Individual - Sprint 01

User-Story
As a Player, I want to have historically accurate references, so that I feel immersed in the era.

>>> sub-issue:
As a character, I want to wear historically accurate clothing, so that I belong in my place and time.

Along with studying up on Java and looking into contemporary medieval rat depictions, I refreshed my knowledge on
clothing in the middle ages.

I won't overwhelm the class with period accurate vocabulary, but the average person wore two or more layers of similar
garments. Everyone from a beggar to a noble would have an undergarment much like an old-fashioned nightgown. The
construction was simpler than what you are probably imagining, but it's that basic chemise shape. It was made of the
best material the person could afford. Linen, cotton, and wool were the most common, though the very rich might have
access to silks and other exotic fabrics. This undergarment was thin and the only part of the clothes that would touch
the skin. It could be cleaned regularly whereas outer garments would only be spot cleaned as they did not get dirty
from body oils and such. The next layer was usually much the same cut, but made from dyed cloth, patterned if you were
wealthy. For men, the garment was shorter (a tunic) and depending on the fashion, quite long or practically a shirt.

Both men and women wore leggings but woman wore floor length dresses so you rarely see them. Another layer of a gown or
tunic was not uncommon, often without sleeves for ease of movement. These could serve to protect their clothes like an
apron or be purely ornamental in wealthier fashion.

Color dyes were made from natural materials and not as vibrant as we can make today, however they were not as dull as
some movies would imply. Nobility favored patterns (think heraldic, very large format which you would almost never see
today; while recreating a period accurate overdress I had to use upholstery fabric as no cotton or wool made today has
a large enough pattern). Embroidery was a way for any class to brighten up a garment, but the higher class you were the
finer your threads. I.E. gold and silver only for the nobility and simple yarn for poorer folk. Some outer garments
could be knitted from yarn just as today. Leather was commonly used for boots, hats, gloves, and bags. Woven and clay
vessels were also common.

The idea of modesty was not as strict as even today. They covered up because it was cold. If working in a field, it was
not seen as obscene to hike up your outer and undergarments to keep them out of the way as you toiled.

Also, people totally bathed. That's a myth. Poorer people bathed in rivers and ponds. Fancy people would have their
servants boil water and put it in tubs for them to bathe. In the winter there was likely less bathing as even then, they
erroneously believed being cold and wet led to getting colds. They did not wash their hair regularly, however they did
care for their hair. Wooden combs with very fine tines combed out any dandruff, natural oils, and bugs. Women regularly
plaited their hair to keep it clean longer and covered their heads with hijab-like scarves to the same effect. Some used
plant oils like lavender to condition the hair after combing.

In anthropomorphic drawings of animals in contemporary texts, animals wore much the same as people, or the still common
today "top but not bottom" look. If we decide to make our rats human-like with clothing, we will have to decide how much
clothing would be appropriate for the story/aesthetic.

I am on track, but I would like to assemble some images and/or draw some examples. Clothing didn't change a lot over
many hundreds of years, but there were fads as there are today. It's probably not worth the effort of representing the
costume of a specific age just to please the handful of medieval scholars. At the end of the day, this is our game.
There's already going to be plenty of medieval enthusiasts pushing up their glasses and saying "actually..." about the
whole rat's spreading the plague thing. However, keeping the costuming based off contemporary manuscript art and away
from 60s Hollywood depictions is probably best.
